# Search_Optimization_for_Clinical_Trial_Records

## Problem Description
Clinical trials, that include but are not limited to participants receiving specific interventions (drugs, devices, procedures, etc.) according to the research plan or protocol created by investiga- tors, are documented and stored by the government as they are expensive in terms of time and money. The study of these trials is core to almost all research in the field to gain insights as well as compare. Certain search engines exist to search for trial reports of your interest through the massive database. Although, considering the sparsity of clinical trials available, often times a user interested in the trials may not be able to put all keywords relevant to the sought studies in their query, thereby creating a need for an engine to expand and optimize search to aid the user. In this project, we propose a recommendation – based engine to expand a user’s search to include all relevant studies, hence optimizing the search experience for the users.

## Dataset
The records for clinical trials/studies globally is released and updated by the National Library of Medicine (NLM) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) annually through the clinicaltrials.gov website. For this study, the latest release of the data is being used, which comprises of roughly 346,000 recorded studies, each in a separate XML file. The records are listed using a unique identi- fier and comprise of attributes indicating the title, type and status of the study, condition, number of participants enrolled, along with start and processed dates of the study. The records also include the sponsors, intervention type, a brief summary as well as a detailed description in some scenarios. In order to preserve the knowledge with respect to the domain, the study of the records would be conducted using the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), maintained by the NLM, which is a hierarchically structured taxonomy. For our study we have extracted and converted this data set exposed as an XML into a trie data structure for efficient scanning.

## Proposed Methods
Through the course of this project, we explored various perspectives of providing recommendations to the end user in order to optimize search results. First, based on a user’s search query, could we recommend additional keywords which are closely related (similar) to the ones in the query which could help expand the search results? We tested the above using methods like association rules mining and collaborative filtering recommendation systems. The MeSH taxonomy was used as the input to generate the MeSH matrix (using TF-IDF) to be used for these modeling/mining methods. We also explored the possibility of recommending trial records similar to the ones retrieved by the user’s search query. This was done without the usage of the tree-structured MeSH taxonomy and would employ the usage of similarity measures and clustering methods. We evaluated the applicability of topic modelling methods like LDA and LSA in order to group documents based on thematic similarity, which could then be used to provide recommendations of similar trials.

## Results
The above described methods help optimize the user’s search for clinical trial records in 2 broad perspectives - recommendations of similar MeSH keywords can be used by the user in downstream retrieval system to expand the results whereas, recommendations of similar trial records display documents close to the user’s query. Both together, allow the user to traverse through a wider scope of documents related to a topic. The profitability of the system could be evaluated based on the effective increase in relevant documents retrieved as a result of the recommendations provided over the base query.
